hi g'day everybody namaste
down order here and welcome back to
Patanjali Yoga Sutras
for the new millennium today we're going
to have a look at the second Sutra in
the first chapter and I believe that
this is the single most important Sutra
in the entire text because this Sutra is
where Patanjali defines precisely what
he means by the word yoga so let's have
a look at it
Patanjali defines yoga as mind
fluctuation cessation so Sutra 2 is yoga
is mind fluctuation cessation let's cut
to Sri for a second and he is going to
enunciate this line here for us this is
the individual breakdown of the words in
the Sutra so over to you Sheree thanks
mate beautiful and I'm gonna have a go
at saying the Sutra as a whole
Yogesh chitta vritti nirodh aha' and so
this literally translates as yoga huh
yoga chitta loosely translates as mind
pretty as fluctuation nirodh aha' as
cessation so let's take a moment to have
a look at each of those words separately
the first word yoga is defined by mind
fluctuation cessation
chitta mind it's only in English
approximation of the word and we're
going to have a deeper look at that in
just a second
pretty
I have translated as fluctuation so if
the fluctuations of your mind the
comings and goings of your thoughts and
your emotions and other things Preity
could also be interpreted as the
movements of your mind or even the
behavior or patterns of your mind
and then nirodh aha' cessation to bring
to stillness so let's look at the word
jitter in a bit more detail here's a
diagram of chittor and there are four
aspects of jitter now you'll know from
your own experience that within your
head there is some knowledge
it could be wrong knowledge could be
right knowledge but within your
experience at all times there's some
type of knowing about what is happening
there's also an emotion going on inside
of your head it's happy or sad and all
sorts of other emotions and of course
there is you you are in your head this
is what we call the ego now the other
aspect of cipta is gypte so in my own
head I think of all four aspects
together as being big chitter and I
think of the single aspect of chitter as
little chitter now little chitta is the
place in our mind where sensory inputs
are revealed to the other aspects of
mind so your sensory inputs are from
touch from sight from sound from taste
and from smell and so these senses
appear in the mind
through the doorway of chitta and once
they are revealed in the cheetah they
get drawn on by the intellect
Budi they get drawn on by the emotions
mana and they get drawn on by the ego a
hum cara and so the intellect creates
knowledge out of these raw inputs the
emotions create emotions out of the raw
inputs and the ego creates stories out
of these raw inputs but these aspects
also feed back into the cheetah so the
knowledge that the Buddha created gets
fed back into the cheetah as a raw input
and so the body can once again draw on
that raw input in the same way that it
fed into it and so you can get a
feedback loop yeah so we can create
knowledge about the knowledge that we
just created and we can have emotional
reactions about the emotions that we're
having and we all know that the ego will
create stories about the stories about
the stories and so each of these aspects
of mind is causal - and resulting from
fluctuations and so yoga as Patanjali
has defined it is bringing the
fluctuations to stillness that is to say
that no more knowledge exists there are
no emotions and there are no stories
just for a little while okay I hope
you've got a little understanding about
what chitta is and why we sort of
translate that as mind because the cipta
are four aspects that
happen within one mind all right now I'm
this diagram and a more thorough
explanation of jitter is found in this
book that Sheree and myself have
recently written if you'd like to get
your hands on a copy of that just go to
my website and in your own time grab
yourself a copy okay
so yoga is mind fluctuation cessation
now I want to bring up another word
Samadhi Samadhi translates as stillness
or accomplishment so Samadhi is bringing
the mind to stillness or it is the
accomplishment of having done so so this
chapter the first chapter of Patanjali
Yoga Sutras is called Samadhi pada and
so the word yoga mind fluctuation
cessation and the word Samadhi stillness
or accomplishment of having bought the
mind to stillness are interchangeable
with each other so one has yoga when one
accomplishes Samadhi all right I'm gonna
leave it there now everybody I hope
you've got a little better understanding
of what Patanjali second yoga Sutra is
and if you need to leave a question in
the comments down below
and perhaps even leave me a like and
subscribe to the channel if you would
like to and in the next video we'll be
looking at the third sutra which tells
us what happens as a result of being
able to bring the minds fluctuations to
stillness so thanks again for watching
everybody and I'll see you on the next
video have an awesome day bye
you